.\"Created with GNOME Manpages Editor Wizard
.\"http://sourceforge.net/projects/gmanedit2
.TH siad 1 "April 6, 2017" "" "siad"

.SH NAME

.B siad
- The Sia daemon downloads the blockchain, uploads files, manages redundancy, monitors hosts for uptime, to name a few of the many tasks that it performs.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.RI 
 siad [ options ] 
 siad version 
 siad modules 
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page explains the
.B siad
program.
.B
siad 
is composed of modules, and each modules provides a set of primary functions on the network. Here is a list and description of the major modules:
.br
.B Gateway: 
Manages the Sia peer network. Finds and connects to peers. Responsible for propagating blocks and transactions.
.br
.B Consensus: 
Accepts and verifies blocks. Keeps track of the longest chain, and notifies other modules when the longest chain has updated to a new longest chain. New valid blocks are sent to the gateway to be propagated around the network
.br
.B Transactionpool: 
Accepts and verifies new, unconfirmed transactions. The set of unconfirmed transactions can be queried by other modules.
.br
.B Wallet: 
Can create addresses and keys for the user. Keeps track of all money that the user has received, and sends money to other users at the user's request.
.br
.B Renter:  
Responsible for uploading data to the network. Will create contracts with hosts, monitor hosts, and restore file redundancy if hosts go offline or become unreliable.
.br
.B Host:  
Accepts contracts from the renter and stores data locally. Receives payment for keeping other users files.
.br


.SH OPTIONS

.B
.IP --agent\ <string>               
 required substring for the user agent (default "Sia-Agent")
.B
.IP --api-addr\ <string>            
 which host:port the API server listens on (default "localhost:9980")
.B
.IP --authenticate-api           
 enable API password protection
.B
.IP --disable-api-security       
 allow siad to listen on a non-localhost address (DANGEROUS someone could control your sia daemon over network). 
.B
.IP --host-addr string           
 which port the host listens on (default ":9982")
.B
.IP -M,\ --modules-string             
 enabled modules, see 'siad modules' for more info (default "cghmrtw")
.B
.IP --no-bootstrap               
 disable bootstrapping on this run
.B
.IP --profile                    
 enable profiling
.B
.IP --profile-directory string   
 location of the profiling directory (default "profiles")
.B
.IP --rpc-addr string            
 which port the gateway listens on (default ":9981")
.B
.IP -d,\ --sia-directory string       
 location of the sia directory


.SH "SEE ALSO"

